One of the biggest and slowest circuits in
an arithmetic and logic unit is the multiplier.
We'll start by developing a straightforward
implementation and then, in the next section,
look into tradeoffs to make it either smaller
or faster.
Here's the multiplication operation for two
unsigned 4-bit operands broken down into its
component operations.
This is exactly how we learned to do it in
primary school.
We take each digit of the multiplier (the
B operand) and use our memorized multiplication
tables to multiply it with each digit of the
multiplicand (the A operand),
dealing with any carries into the next column
as we process the multiplicand right-to-left.
The output from this step is called a partial
product and then we repeat the step for the
remaining bits of the multiplier.
Each partial product is shifted one digit
to the left, reflecting the increasing weight
of the multiplier digits.
In our case the digits are just single bits,
i.e., they're 0 or 1 and the multiplication
table is pretty simple!
In fact, the 1-bit-by-1-bit binary multiplication
circuit is just a 2-input AND gate.
And look Mom, no carries!
The partial products are N bits wide since
there are no carries.
If the multiplier has M bits, there will be
M partial products.
And when we add the partial products together,
we'll get an N+M bit result if we account
for the possible carry-out from the high-order
bit.
The easy part of the multiplication is forming
the partial products - it just requires some
AND gates.
The more expensive operation is adding together
the M N-bit partial products.
Here's the schematic for the combinational
logic needed to implement the 4x4 multiplication,
which would be easy to extend for larger multipliers
(we'd need more rows) or larger multiplicands
(we'd need more columns).
The M*N 2-input AND gates compute the bits
of the M partial products.
The adder modules add the current row's partial
product with the sum of the partial products
from the earlier rows.
Actually there are two types of adder modules.
The full adder is used when the modules needs
three inputs.
The simpler half adder is used when only two
inputs are needed.
The longest path through this circuit takes
a moment to figure out.
Information is always moving either down a
row or left to the adjacent column.
Since there are M rows and, in any particular
row, N columns, there are at most N+M modules
along any path from input to output.
So the latency is order N, since M and N differ
by just some constant factor.
Since this is a combinational circuit, the
throughput is just 1/latency.
And the total amount of hardware is order
N^2.
In the next section, we'll investigate how
to reduce the hardware costs, or, separately,
how to increase the throughput.
But before we do that, let's take a moment
to see how the circuit would change if the
operands were two's complement integers instead
of unsigned integers.
With a two's complement multiplier and multiplicand,
the high-order bit of each has negative weight.
So when adding together the partial products,
we'll need to sign-extend each of the N-bit
partial products to the full N+M-bit width
of the addition.
This will ensure that a negative partial product
is properly treated when doing the addition.
And, of course, since the high-order bit of
the multiplier has a negative weight, we'd
subtract instead of add the last partial product.
Now for the clever bit.
We'll add 1's to various of the columns and
then subtract them later, with the goal of
eliminating all the extra additions caused
by the sign-extension.
We'll also rewrite the subtraction of the
last partial product as first complementing
the partial product and then adding 1.
This is all a bit mysterious but…
Here in step 3 we see the effect of all the
step 2 machinations.
Let's look at the high order bit of the first
partial product X3Y0.
If that partial product is non-negative, X3Y0
is a 0, so all the sign-extension bits are
0 and can be removed.
The effect of adding a 1 in that position
is to simply complement X3Y0.
On the other hand, if that partial product
is negative, X3Y0 is 1, and all the sign-extension
bits are 1.
Now when we add a 1 in that position, we complement
the X3Y0 bit back to 0, but we also get a
carry-out.
When that's added to the first sign-extension
bit (which is itself a 1), we get zero with
another carry-out.
And so on, with all the sign-extension bits
eventually getting flipped to 0 as the carry
ripples to the end.
Again the net effect of adding a 1 in that
position is to simply complement X3Y0.
We do the same for all the other sign-extended
partial products, leaving us with the results
shown here.
In the final step we do a bit of arithmetic
on the remaining constants to end up with
this table of work to be done.
Somewhat to our surprise, this isn't much
different than the original table for the
unsigned multiplication.
There are a few partial product bits that
need to be complemented, and two 1-bits that
need to be added to particular columns.
The resulting circuitry is shown here.
We've changed some of the AND gates to NAND
gates to perform the necessary complements.
And we've changed the logic necessary to deal
with the two 1-bits that needed to be added
in.
The colored elements show the changes made
from the original unsigned multiplier circuitry.
Basically, the circuit for multiplying two's
complement operands has the same latency,
throughput and hardware costs as the original
circuitry.